# Clinical-Costing
Allocate costs to records of patient care.

## Outline
Clinical Costing is the process of allocating costs, from the General Ledger, for a specific period, to records of patient care, for the matching period. Ideally this is done by following every patient, for every second of their episode of care, and recording everything that happened and the associated direct and indirect costs. Obviously that's impractical, but a good approximation can be achieved by an algorithmic distribution of the costs recorded in the General Ledger. And, surprisingly, this can be done with one simple algorithm; proportional distribution. The art in clinical costing, and it is an art, is in configuring funding source and target, and then determining the bases for the computation of the proportions used for the proportional distribution. The 'weights' can be anything, in any unit of measure. For medicines you could use the cost of the drug, over the counter a the local pharmacist, plus any goverment subsidy for the drug, as the weight. That "weight" would be a dollar value, but the sum of these weights would not be the same as the cost of running the pharmacy. None the less, you could proportionally distribute the cost of running the pharmacy to patients, based upon these "weights". However, one pharmacist may spend all day, every day, doing rounds and checking the drug charts of every patient. You could take this salary, and the associated overheads, out of the cost of running the pharmacy and distribute it independently to patients based upon bed days (a weight of 1.0 for each bed day). You can even scale this "bed day", for each patient, by the count of drugs administed to the patient each day, on the assumption that more drugs means a longer drug chart and more to check.

As you can see, the art of clinical costing is the art of making assumptions about what things reflect, or are a proxy for, actual costs. For instance, you could distribute "Power" based upon floor space but this ignores the fact that some departments, such as Radiology, use specific pieces of equipment that consume considerable amounts of power. So the "weights" for "Power" might be floor space multiplied by a scaling factor for each area.

Clinical Costs can envisaged as two different types of costs; direct and indirect. The lines here can get a little blurred, For instance a pathology test involves a direct cost and "Payroll Services" is definitely an indirect cost. Nurses wages would seem to be a direct cost, but without a Patient and Nurse Dependency Application you have no way of knowing which nurse spent how much time with each patient. And nurses have non-patient-direct time, such as filling in timesheets, checking stock and re-ordering. So any direct allocation of nurses wages to patients will be an approximation.

Indirect costs are associated with indirect cost centres and can be proportionally distributed to other indirect cost centres. For instance, "Payroll Services" may be distributed to "Maintenance Department", and other cost centres, based upon total wages for the period. And "Maintenance Department" may be distributed to other cost centres, such a "Medical Ward", "Emergency" and "Administration", based upon floor space. "Administration" is another Indirect Cost centre that will need to be proportionaltly distributed. To support this you need to support a large number of levels of cascading costing. However, some configurations could have costs cascading up as well as down. For instance, "Payroll Services" have offices (floor space), so some of their costs, distributed to "Maintenance Department" will come back when "Maintenance Department" is distributed on floor space. To facilitate this, all Indirect Costs are distributed before any Direct Costs and there are two ways of doing that; cascading and iteration. With a cascading distribution, Indirect Cost centres and ranked from most indirect to least indirect and costs are proportionally distributed from the Indirect Cost centres in that order, with no costs being allowed to cascade back to an already distributed cost centre. So, if "Payroll Services" is proportionally distributed before "Maintenance Department" and "Maintenance Department" is distributed on floor space, then "Payroll Services" is deemed to have no floor space, thus preventing any costs returning to "Payrole Services". With an iteration distribution there is no ranking and costs can flow from anywhere to anywhere. After the first distribution most of the costs will have gone from Indirect Cost centres to Direct Cost centres, but some will have from an Indirect Cost centre so another Indirect Cost centre. When this occurs another iteration of distribution will occur which will result in a reduction in the cost remaining in the Indirect Cost centres. Futher iterations of distribution will be performed until the total cost remaining in the Indirect Cost centres reaches an acceptably small amount. A cascading distrubution will be much faster that an interative distribution and an interative distribution may not result in a more accurate distribution of costs. Fortunately, a single configuration can be distributed using either the cascading distrubution script of the iterative distribution script.

